[IMP] accounting/l10n_pe: PLE 12.1 and PLE 13.1 inventory reports (#11214)
odoo/documentation: content/applications/finance/fiscal_localizations/peru.rst

Once the invoice is validated with |SUNAT|, customers can download the :file:`.zip` with the CDR,
XML, and PDF files directly from the customer portal by clicking the :guilabel:`Download` button.

Reports
=======

> Permanent Inventory Reports: PLE 12.1 and PLE 13.1
> --------------------------------------------------

Reviewer: Please use [sentence case for headings](https://www.odoo.com/documentation/master/contributing/documentation/content_guidelines.html#document-structure) (and add a custom anchor for later use) :)
```suggestion
.. _peru/reports-ple:

Permanent inventory reports: |PLE| 12.1 and |PLE| 13.1
------------------------------------------------------
```

> Two permanent inventory reports can be produced in Odoo for Peruvian accounting:
> PLE 12.1 and PLE 13.1. All inventory transactions made need to be reported. PLE 12.1 only records
> transactions by physical units, while PLE 13.1 tracks both physical units and the monetary value of
> inventory.
> 
> Context
> ~~~~~~~

Reviewer: IMO the "Context" heading is unnecessary as context is implied by this paragraph. 

Also small edits to add abbreviation short hands and file role
```suggestion
Two permanent inventory reports can be produced in Odoo for Peruvian accounting: |PLE| 12.1 and
|PLE| 13.1 as a :file:`.txt` file. All inventory transactions made need to be reported. |PLE| 12.1
only records transactions by physical units, while |PLE| 13.1 tracks both physical units and the
monetary value of inventory.
```

> PLE 12.1: Permanent Inventory Record in Physical Units
> ******************************************************

Reviewer: Update heading
```suggestion
|PLE| 12.1: Permanent inventory record in physical units
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
```

> This record **only tracks inventory in physical units**, focusing on the inflow and outflow of goods
> for effective management and planning. It must be maintained semi-annually (January-June and
> July-December) with monthly transaction details reported within these periods. The submission
> deadlines are October 1st for the first semester and April 1st for the second semester,
> in accordance with Superintendent Resolution 169-2015.

Reviewer: To avoid the ambiguous "This"
```suggestion
|PLE| 12.1 **only tracks inventory in physical units**, focusing on the inflow and outflow of goods
for effective management and planning. It must be maintained semi-annually (January-June and
July-December) with monthly transaction details reported within these periods. The submission
deadlines are October 1st for the first semester and April 1st for the second semester,
in accordance with the *Superintendent Resolution 169-2015*.
```

> PLE 13.1: Permanent Valued Inventory Record
> *******************************************
> 
> This record tracks **both physical quantities and monetary values of inventory**, providing a
> comprehensive view for tax and management purposes. It must be maintained semi-annually
> (January-June and July-December) with monthly transaction details reported within these periods. The
> submission deadlines are October 1st for the first semester and April 1st for the second semester,
> in accordance with Superintendent Resolution 169-2015.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|PLE| 13.1: Permanent valued inventory record
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

|PLE| 13.1 tracks **both physical quantities and monetary values of inventory**, providing a
comprehensive view for tax and management purposes. It must be maintained semi-annually
(January-June and July-December) with monthly transaction details reported within these periods. The
submission deadlines are October 1st for the first semester and April 1st for the second semester,
in accordance with the *Superintendent Resolution 169-2015*.
```

Configuration
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> Before generating the PLE 12.1 or PLE 13.1 reports, it is recommended to
> :ref:`install and update <general/install>` all Peruvian modules (`l10n_pe`).
> 
> Most importantly, install the **Peru - Stock Reports** module (`l10n_pe_reports_stock`).

Reviewer: Small formatting edits :)
```suggestion
Before generating the |PLE| 12.1 or |PLE| 13.1 reports, it is recommended to :ref:`install and
update <general/install>` all Peruvian modules (`l10n_pe`).

Most importantly, install the :guilabel:`Peru - Stock Reports` (`l10n_pe_reports_stock`) module.
```

Update relevant fields
**********************

Once the **Peru - Stock Reports** module is installed, consider updating and completing the fields
for:

> - :ref:`Products <peru/reports/products>`
> - :ref:`Warehouses <peru/reports/warehouses>`
> - :ref:`Inventory transfers <peru/reports/transfers>`

Reviewer: Update ref/anchor formatting to be more descriptive 
```suggestion
- :ref:`Products <peru/reports-ple-products>`
- :ref:`Warehouses <peru/reports-ple-warehouses>`
- :ref:`Inventory transfers <peru/reports-ple-transfers>`
```

> .. _peru/reports/products:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. _peru/reports-ple-products:
```

Products
^^^^^^^^

There are a few ways to configure a product for PLE reporting:

> - **Type of existence:** Navigate to: `Sales --> Product --> Product`. Select a product. In the
>   :guilabel:`Accounting` tab, select the :guilabel:`Type of Existence` according to SUNAT's Table 5
>   for inventory reporting.

Reviewer: Pull ":" out of bold formatting, use :menuselection: role for nav instructions, and update formatting
```suggestion
- **Type of existence**: Navigate to :menuselection:`Sales --> Products --> Products` and select a
  product. In the :guilabel:`Accounting` tab, select the :guilabel:`Type of Existence` according to
  |SUNAT|'s table 5 for inventory reporting.
```

   .. image:: peru/l10n-pe-type-of-existence.png
      :alt: Select Type of Existence for a product.

> - **Automatic inventory valuation:** For storable goods (products for which inventory is tracked),

Reviewer: IMO can be simplified with a :dfn: role :)
```suggestion
- **Automatic inventory valuation**: For storable goods (:dfn:`products with tracked inventory`),
```

  it's important to use :doc:`automatic inventory valuation
  <../../inventory_and_mrp/inventory/product_management/inventory_valuation/inventory_valuation_config>`.
  Once automatic inventory valuation is turned on, this valuation method can be turned on for
  a product's :ref:`Product Category <inventory/warehouses_storage/valuation-on-product-category>`.

- **Costing method:** Storable goods also need a :doc:`costing method
  <../../inventory_and_mrp/inventory/product_management/inventory_valuation/inventory_valuation_config>`

>   that is *not* set to `Standard Price`. This is important as the Journal Entries generated from
>   stock moves will feed the PLE reports.

Reviewer: Update formatting, optional to use italics or bold here, using bold since it stands out more
```suggestion
  that is **not** set to `Standard Price`. This is important as the journal entries generated from
  stock moves feed the |PLE| reports.
```

> .. _peru/reports/warehouses:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. _peru/reports-ple-warehouses:
```

Warehouses
^^^^^^^^^^

> When setting up a warehouse, the :guilabel:`Annex Establishment Code` field is important for
> reporting. This code acts as a unique ID and should be different per warehouse. The number should
> only be a numeric combination, containing between 4 to 7 digits.

Reviewer: It is best to link to existing docs, to help the user with this instruction
```suggestion
When :doc:`setting up a warehouse
<../../inventory_and_mrp/inventory/warehouses_storage/inventory_management/warehouses>`, the
:guilabel:`Annex Establishment Code` field is important for reporting. This code acts as a unique
ID and should be unique to each warehouse. The number should only be a numeric combination,
containing between 4 to 7 digits.
```

.. image:: peru/l10n-pe-annex-establishment-code.png
   :alt: Choose a unique ID between 4-7 numeric digits.

> .. _peru/reports/transfers:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. _peru/reports-ple-transfers:
```

Inventory transfers
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> Transferring inventory is a key process captured in the PLE 12.1 and PLE 13.1 reports.
> :doc:`Inventory transfers <../../inventory/shipping_and_receiving/daily_operations>` include both
> incoming and outgoing shipments.
> 
> When validating an inventory transfer (either on a warehouse receipt or delivery order), select the
> :guilabel:`Type of Operation` performed according to SUNAT's Table 12 for permanent inventory
> reporting.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Transferring inventory is a key process captured in the |PLE| 12.1 and |PLE| 13.1 reports.
:doc:`Inventory transfers <../../inventory_and_mrp/inventory/shipping_receiving/daily_operations>`
include both incoming and outgoing shipments.

When validating an inventory transfer (either on a warehouse receipt or delivery order), select the
:guilabel:`Type of Operation (PE)` performed according to |SUNAT|'s table 12 for permanent inventory
reporting.
```

.. image:: peru/l10n-pe-type-of-operation-pe.png
   :alt: Select a Type of Operations from SUNAT's Table 12

> Generate a TXT file for Permanent Inventory Kardex Reports
> ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Generate a .TXT file for permanent inventory Kardex reports
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
```

> PLE 12.1 and 13.1 come as two, separate books. The books need to be downloaded in `.txt` file format
> from Odoo, and then they should be submitted to the SUNAT PLE software.
> 
> On the `Inventory Valuation Report
> <https://www.odoo.com/documentation/18.0/applications/inventory_and_mrp/inventory/
> product_management/inventory_valuation/using_inventory_valuation.html#inventory-valuation-report>`,
> click the :guilabel:`PLE REPORT` button. Select the period and choose a report to export:
> either the PLE 12.1 or PLE 13.1 record. Then, Odoo will generate a `.txt` file for the chosen
> report.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|PLE| 12.1 and 13.1 come as two, separate books. The books need to be downloaded in :file:`.txt`
file format from Odoo, and then they should be submitted to the |SUNAT| |PLE| software.

On the :ref:`Inventory Valuation Report <inventory/management/reporting/valuation-report>`, click
the :guilabel:`PLE Reports` button. Then, select the :guilabel:`Period` and choose a report to
export: either the :guilabel:`PLE 12.1` or :guilabel:`PLE 13.1` record. Odoo generates a
:file:`.txt` file for the chosen report.
```

.. image:: peru/l10n-ple-export-button.png
   :alt: Export Buttons selection

.. note::

>    The functionality allows you to download the report in `.txt` format,
>    there is no preview or visualization like other Odoo Inventory Reports.

Reviewer: To avoid the use of "you" and to be more direct
```suggestion
   Only a download of the report in :file:`.txt` format is available, there is no preview or
   visualization available within Odoo.
```

Once the invoice is validated with |SUNAT|, customers can download the :file:`.zip` with the CDR,
XML, and PDF files directly from the customer portal by clicking the :guilabel:`Download` button.

Reports
=======

.. _peru/reports-ple:

Permanent inventory reports: |PLE| 12.1 and |PLE| 13.1
------------------------------------------------------

Two permanent inventory reports can be produced in Odoo for Peruvian accounting: |PLE| 12.1 and

> |PLE| 13.1 as a :file:`.txt` file. All inventory transactions made need to be reported. |PLE| 12.1

Author: Hi @dade-odoo 

The feature allows the user to export two separate txt reports, with two separate buttons.

Either A or B, not both at the same time, so your recommendation of wording makes more sense.

Thanks for your observation :)

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/d1391225-442a-4219-bfed-c57b70cb9392)

only records transactions by physical units, while |PLE| 13.1 tracks both physical units and the
monetary value of inventory.

|PLE| 12.1: Permanent inventory record in physical units
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

|PLE| 12.1 **only tracks inventory in physical units**, focusing on the inflow and outflow of goods
for effective management and planning. It must be maintained semi-annually (January-June and
July-December) with monthly transaction details reported within these periods. The submission
deadlines are October 1st for the first semester and April 1st for the second semester,

> in accordance with the *Superintendent Resolution 169-2015*.

Author: Hello @dade-odoo 
https://www.sunat.gob.pe/legislacion/superin/2015/169-2015.pdf

This is a public general resource, if you want to add it as a link

|PLE| 13.1: Permanent valued inventory record
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

|PLE| 13.1 tracks **both physical quantities and monetary values of inventory**, providing a
comprehensive view for tax and management purposes. It must be maintained semi-annually
(January-June and July-December) with monthly transaction details reported within these periods. The
submission deadlines are October 1st for the first semester and April 1st for the second semester,

> in accordance with the *Superintendent Resolution 169-2015*.

Author: Link shared, thanks!

> in accordance with the *Superintendent Resolution 169-2015*.

Author: hi @dade-odoo here is the original reference in Spanish, thanks!

"Resolución de Superintendencia N° 169-2015"

  <../../inventory_and_mrp/inventory/product_management/inventory_valuation/inventory_valuation_config>`
  that is **not** set to `Standard Price`. This is important as the journal entries generated from
  stock moves feed the |PLE| reports.

.. _peru/reports-ple-warehouses:

Warehouses
^^^^^^^^^^

When :doc:`setting up a warehouse
<../../inventory_and_mrp/inventory/warehouses_storage/inventory_management/warehouses>`, the
:guilabel:`Annex Establishment Code` field is important for reporting. This code acts as a unique
ID and should be unique to each warehouse. The number should only be a numeric combination,
containing between 4 to 7 digits.

.. image:: peru/l10n-pe-annex-establishment-code.png
   :alt: Choose a unique ID between 4-7 numeric digits.

.. _peru/reports-ple-transfers:

Inventory transfers
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Transferring inventory is a key process captured in the |PLE| 12.1 and |PLE| 13.1 reports.
:doc:`Inventory transfers <../../inventory_and_mrp/inventory/shipping_receiving/daily_operations>`
include both incoming and outgoing shipments.

When validating an inventory transfer (either on a warehouse receipt or delivery order), select the

> :guilabel:`Type of Operation (PE)` performed according to |SUNAT|'s table 12 for permanent inventory

Author: Hi @dade-odoo here is the link http://contenido.app.sunat.gob.pe/insc/Libros+y+Registros/Informacion+m%C3%ADnimo+formatos/FORMATO_12_1.pdf

reporting.

.. image:: peru/l10n-pe-type-of-operation-pe.png

>    :alt: Select a Type of Operations from SUNAT's table 12.

Author: Hi @dade-odoo users tend to not find these field easily, that's why the addition on visually help them know where to find it, also for the leads to know we do cover those mandatory fields.
But feel free to skip it, cheers!

>    :alt: Select a Type of Operations from SUNAT's table 12.

Reviewer 2: I understand wanting to make it easy for users, but we avoid screenshots that just show "hey this field exists/is located here/has these options" because these things frequently change, and then the user can be even more confused if their DB doesn't match the screenshot. Your text is clear enough to me in explaining that we cover those mandatory fields, so I do think we should get rid of this one too.
